# A simpler method of preprocessing MALDI-TOF MS data for differential biomarker analysis: stem cell and melanoma cancer studies


Proposes a technique to contrast inter and intra subjet variability.

Previous techniques limitations identified - Several steps, mathematical approaches, remove noise from data, compatibile with only low resolution data.




In protenomics, the uncertainity should be removed from the raw data.



## Methods

### Preprocessing
<ol>
<li> SpecAlign software - for data imputation and average spectrum calculation (https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/21/9/2088/409142) - provides various settings that can be configured by the user. smoothening - savitzy golay filter
<li>  Used standard average function to crunch the spectrum size from 2.7mil to 95k m/z.
<li> Compare intensity of adjacent spectrum and assign 1 if increasing, 0 if decreasing. This was then used in constructing gaussian plot. (Basically by computing mean of the ones and zeroes)
<li> Standard scale peaks in each region. 
<li> 3000 peaks were identified.

<li> Problems with peaks : 
<ul> 
    <li>Peak might contain multiple protein peptides. 
    <li> Mass drifts
    <li> outliers
</ul> 

<li> Start of peak is identified by 3 consecutive zeros.
<li> Upper bound of peak decided by first setting checkpoints based on a heuristic on mechanical noise. And the exact point was identified by picking the point with minimum zeros at these checkpoints.
<li> 

</ol>

### Algorithm
There are two stages: First stage finds the peaks, second stage creates a predictive model.
<ol> 
<li> First genetic algorithm with ANN is used to permute over different combinations of peaks, evaluate, rank, and filter the peaks.
<li> More about genetic algorithms can be found here - [GANN](r.2.md).
<li> Finally one simple ANN is modelled on the peaks data . (50 random sampling)

</ol>




</ol>

# Directions
<ul>
<li> This study standardizes peaks using median. But not using the callibrant. It would be nice to show that callibrant normalization is better.
<li> Need to read about genetic algorithms (GA)
<li> GA could be a good direction if the intention is to find peaks manually.
<li> Application of CNN, RNN instead of ANN?

 











[main](../README.md)